SOURCE: /Users/m.diluca@bham.ac.uk/Library/CloudStorage/OneDrive-UniversityofBirmingham/Documents - Mine/CFS  Final max.docx
PARAGRAPHS: 38 TABLES: 4

=== BODY PARAGRAPHS ===
P001 [Normal] ATOUCH: A BIOINSPIRED ARTIFICIAL TOUCH INTERFACE
P002 [Normal] VISION
P003 [Normal] Quality and importance: The thousands of cutaneous mechanoreceptors in our hands allow us to i) sense texture by the vibrations and forces that are elicited when a finger pad slides over a surface, and ii) control pressure and slip for gripping and object manipulating. There are large and growing academic research and commercial efforts that are attempting to enable comparable capabilities for prosthetic and robotic hands . will be evaluated against human activities that rely on tactile perception, which include (a) grasping objects  with a wide dynamic force range, from soft fruits to heavy objects, (b) sensing the shape, softness, and texture of solid objects as a basis for discriminative touch and precision manipulation, and (c) identifying material classes such as metals, plastics and liquids. will be constructed as a network of slow and fast acting flexible sensing filaments in a flexible  matrix (Fig. 1) so that it follows several biomimetic principles on which touch relies: (a) the presence of slow- and fast-adapting receptors for perceiving both quasi-static and dynamic events, (b) stochastic location of sensing elements, and (c) different receptive-fields. A modular approach will be adopted into an eFinger and finally an eGlove for demonstrati on robotic and prosthetic hands. The outputs will be interpreted by employing a two-step Machine Learning (ML) architecture that comprises a decoder and a renderer. The decoder will map eSkin signals semantic labels. The renderer will determine the haptic signals that most closely correspond to those that a user associates with real-world touch events. The two algorithms will lead to an understanding of the specification that is required to digitally represent object interaction events. semantic labelstextural, material and geometric propertiesgoal-driven manipulation of .
P004 [Normal]    There have been rapid technological advances in wearable HFDs  and, given the commercial 
P005 [Normal] and societal benefits, this is expected to continue. The ability to communicate via semantic labels will allow compatibility with any existing or novel HFD following suitable training. ATOUCH will employ the current state-of- the-art HFD, which is the Haptx glove . Multiple (135) inflatable domes driven by microfluidics provide whole hand tactile and vibrotactile feedback. Force feedback is enabled by microfluidic actuation technology that complements the tactile feedback. Moreover, the tactile components will be re-assembled as an arm wearable HFD, which may be more convenient for some applications and would be essential for double lower arm amputees. Another commercially available HFD (Weart TouchDriver Pro glove ) will be evaluated with less tactile functionality but much lower cost. Consequently, it will be possible to demonstrate the versatility of the ATOUCH eSkin and will provide an opportunity to understand the minimum requirements for a user to acquire a useful perception of tactile events.
P006 [Normal] Advancing current understanding and generating new knowledge: 
P007 [List Paragraph] (i) The project will enable the creation of an eSkin that replicates the spatial and temporal resolution of natural touch. It will lay the foundations for next-generation robotic telemanipulation and prosthetic systems with human-like tactile perception and control.
P008 [List Paragraph] (ii) A two-step ML architecture (Fig. 2) will be developed that decodes and renders eSkin signals into meaningful haptic experiences with a wearable HFD. A semantic haptic language  will link sensor data to perceptual labels to generate new knowledge about the minimal computational and physical requirements that are necessary to represent touch digitally. This approach will clarify how multiple tactile signals interact to support dexterous manipulation and inform the design of adaptive, perceptually grounded haptic systems for robotics and prosthetics. 
P009 [List Paragraph] (iii)  HFDs will inevitably have some limitations in matching the experience with real objects so that the aim will be to determine the “best” artificial correspondence between semantic labels and haptic signals that the HFD actually can produce for tasks involving object contact while recognising that such correspondence will never lead to fully veridical rendering by the HFD. 
P010 [Normal] Timeliness: Although there have been many advances in the development of tactile sensors, they still have a range of performance limitations such as degradation during repeated deformation, hysteresis, non-linearity, and thermal stability , but some of these limitations have been overcome by Meta’s Digit 360 artificial fingertip . ATOUCH will develop touch sensing with resolution capabilities approaching that of Digit 360 but it will not be limited by the form factor, size, robustness and dynamic force range, which will allow a much greater range of applications including whole hand sensing. It will improve haptic feedback in terms of the somatosensory functionalities associated with natural human tissue and thus allow robots to interact more intelligently with their environments and allow upper limb prosthetic patients to more effectively restore the functionality that is more comparable with a natural hand. 
P011 [Normal]     The global markets for tactile sensors was $16.4B in 2024  and personal robots was $21.5B in 2019  and growing rapidly. The growth rate for mobile robots is 20–30% pa until 2030 due to rising labour costs and shortages; the number is projected to and exceed 4.2 million . More than 0.5M people in the US alone have upper limb loss  and the lack of sensory feedback has been cited as a cause of prosthesis rejection since it severely impacts coordination and dexterity . The upper limb prosthetics market size was $0.7B in 2020 and is projected to reach $1B by 2030 . The augmented and virtual reality markets are expected to reach $100B in 2028  and ATOUCH will greatly enhance the user experience by improving the realism that is delivered by an HFD. 
P012 [Normal]     The research aligns with EPSRC’s Strategic Delivery Plan to support the UK’s ambition to be a science superpower by investing in world-class ideas through discovery research based on the core discipline priority of Physical and Mathematical Sciences and underpinning multidisciplinary research that will contribute to Health Care and economic growth via the technologies that are dependent on haptic feedback and tactile sensors.      
P013 [Normal] Impacts: i) Given the geometric versatility and expected performance of the ATOUCH eSkin, it has a wide range of potential applications. For example, an eGlove demonstrator will be made since sensing over a whole palm when holding an object provides improved feedback more than just five fingertips. Whole body eSkins for humanoid robots are now considered a major safety requirement particularly for the consumer market. The detection of object interactions is also required, for example, in extreme environments, such as nuclear waste handling or operations in deep sea, where the use of cameras and lidars may not be feasible and also for applications in which privacy is important, e.g personal robots. The sensing can be tailored for such applications, e.g. object contact detection requires only a sparse array of force or possibly thermal sensors. ii) Delivering haptic feedback in commercial media is significantly less advanced than that of graphical and auditory feedback. ATOUCH will advance the understanding of artificial touch that underpins the needs of the vast range of commercial, societal and clinical applications. Such benefits of exploiting this novel capability will have applications in fields such as robotic assistance for the elderly and infirm, haptically assisted surgery, neurorehabilitation and neuroprosthetics. ATOUCH could be exploited for the closed-loop control of autonomous robots, which is still in its infancy. It will also benefit the electromyographic (EMG) control of the movement of prosthetic arms, for example, high-fidelity haptic rendering is essential for robotics and prosthetics when complex manipulation tasks are performed e.g. in the control of slip.	
P014 [Normal] APPROACH
P015 [Normal] Objectives: The overall aim of ATOUCH is to develop a novel eSkin that out-performs existing systems with the following main objectives:
P016 [List Paragraph] Build an eSkin with the form factors of an eTile, eFinger and eGlove having humanoid tactile modalities and optimise the designs using finite element analysis (FEA).
P017 [List Paragraph] Develop a decoder algorithm to process the eSkin signals for interpretation as meaningful semantic labels that describe the tactile features of the environment.
P018 [List Paragraph] Develop a haptic renderer algorithm to generate HFD signals that are most effectively connected to the semantic labels according to user reports.
P019 [List Paragraph] Demonstrate the performance of the ATOUCH ATI by psychophysical evaluation of healthy subjects, prosthetic patients and the control of robotic hands.
P020 [Normal] Methodology: The eSkins will be fabricated using a silicone elastomer with an embedded network of slow acting filaments for detecting bulk deformations and fast acting filaments that will monitor surface deformations and vibrations. The eTile will be modelled and optimised using FEA by implementing virtual tactile events and developing ML algorithms to optimise the number density and locations of the filaments; a prototype is shown in Fig. 3 with the output signal from pressing with a fingertip. This will involve a knowledge of the precise locations of the filaments but, for the other form factors, an approximate optimal network will be refined using training by tangible tactile actions. The semantic labels will generate haptic signals that drive the HFD. User experience will be evaluated, through psychophysical tasks, semantic-label matching, and goal-directed manipulated measures. These data and user reports will be employed to refine the processing stages and the design of the eSkins. ATOUCH will be organised by four Work Packages: WP1 for developing the eSkins, WP2 and 3 for developing the algorithms for the Decoder of the semantic labels and the Renderer, and WP4 for demonstration purposes. Three PDRAs will be employed at the University of Birmingham (UoB) and Swansea (SU). RA1 at UoB will design, construct and evaluate the outputs of the eSkins. RA2 also at UoB will perform user studies to define haptic rendering, viz., the mapping from semantic labels and movement context to HFD commands that produce semantically congruent percepts. RA3 at SU will be responsible for the FEA modelling. The ML will be developed jointly by the PDRAs. There will be weekly meetings between the DRAs and their supervisors, monthly teleconference meetings between the investigators and PDRAs to ensure effective collaboration, and ad hoc visits between the participating partners when they are essential for progress. The investigators and PDRAs will attend biannual Industrial Advisory Group meetings.  
P021 [Normal] T1.1 eTile design optimisation: The material model and parameters of the silicone elastomer matrix and sensor filaments will be measured in T1.2 as a basis for FEA modelling of an eTile with a range of relevant virtual tactile scenarios to generate the 'ground truth’ data. This will rely on the latest developments in FEA technologies, constitutive modelling of polymeric biomaterials at finite strains and nonlinear solution strategies for large deformation analyses . Fine features of the sense of touch that rely on vibrations, friction, slip/sliding, etc., will be captured by including generic capabilities for frictional contact analysis. Such simulations will be used to optimise the design of the eTile in terms of the number of network layers, packing density, and distribution of the two sensing filament types. The optimisation methodology will rely on an extensive range of FEA generated and experimental data from T1.3 and will utilise an in-house optimisation framework that employs a range of problem adapted optimisation algorithms in combination with the latest ML techniques . The Weber fraction will be used to quantify the threshold difference in perception that can be detected compared to the intensity of the original stimulus; for tactile stimuli, there are many reported values e.g. for stiffness the value is approximately 0.20 – 0.30 . A similar approach will be adopted for the FEA of the eTile with a range of virtual tactile events such as softness, shape, roughness and friction.  The concept of perceptual constancy is well-established for humans e.g. the perception of the relative softness of an object is not influenced by the way in which the object is touched. However, this concept has been relatively unexplored in the case of touch sensors and will be relevant for the ATOUCH eSkin since it would greatly simplify the categorisation of touch events. T1.2 eTile manufacture: The process for making an eSkin will be developed initially for the eTile; a schematic diagram of the design was shown in Fig. 1. It will have a network of flexible micro-channels encasing electro-active/electro-responsive filaments (‘nerves’) that will respond to deformations and vibrations, and unlike many existing sensor types, they will be able to sense the spatially resolved 3D deformation fields including shear. There will be fast-acting filaments (25-50 μm) made with electro-active polymers (piezoelectric particles in PDMS) that will be located closer to the free surface of the eSkin. This will enable them to rapidly react to small surface deformations and surface vibrations. In addition, there will be slower acting filaments (100-200 μm) made with a force sensitive resistive material (carbon infused elastomers) that will be positioned deeper into the eSkin for reacting to larger deformation fields. By employing elastomeric sensors, it will allow a large dynamic force range to be achieved that is resistant to overloading unlike those with more conventional relatively fragile electronic components. The mechanical properties of the silicone matrix and sensors will be determined by extensional measurements as inputs for T1.1. The eTile will be manufactured using a combination of vacuum filling e.g  and lost cast moulding e.g . Electrical connections will be made to the ends of the filaments by embedding fine copper/gold wires. Wireless sensing units will be embedded near the free surface of the eTile: i) MEMS IMU (Inertial Measurement Unit) devices will monitor global vibrations, orientation, displacement and velocity and ii) micro heat flux sensors will identify material types. Bespoke electronics will power and acquire signals from the eTile. T1.3 eTile evaluation: An eTile will be fabricated based on the optimised design (T1.1) and the spatial distribution of the filament networks will be determined using X-ray microcomputed tomography. The effects of any deviations from the optimised design will be evaluated using the FEA to ensure that they are not significant. The performance will be evaluated by comparing the output with the well-defined virtual tactile events employed in T1.1 that will constitute the basis for the semantic labels (WP2) to be rendered and delivered by the HFD in order to estimate the fidelity. This will involve automated pressing and sliding across a range of different textures and materials using a piezoelectric transducer based tribometer, with a frequency response of 2 kHz, to control the normal force, sliding velocity, contact path and number of repetitions. The results will be employed iteratively with T1.1 to ensure that the optimal performance has been achieved. T1.4 eFinger: An eFinger will be formed by locating an optimised eTile on the tip of a silicone elastomer carrier finger with a thin silicone elastomer coating and over-moulding with a silicone elastomer membrane, which will protect the wiring. The eTile will be treated previously by an oxygen plasma to increase the surface energy and promote adhesion. The over-coating will be similarly treated so that the hydrophilicity, tribological and mechanical properties are more similar to human skin . The wires will be connected to a wrist mounted on-board control system that will provide inference at a speed that is equal or better than that of human perception. The eFinger will be evaluated in WPs 3 and 4.
P022 [Normal] The ML development in WP2 and WP3 will rely on the extensive use of both the generic PyTorch and touch specialised Pytouch libraries , together with in-house ML techniques  that will be adapted for the eSkins. To transform the eFinger output into semantic labels, ML algorithms will be developed by combining Convolutional (CNNs) and Recurrent Neural Networks (RNNs). The Decoder will convert eFinger signals into semantic labels that will provide a comprehensive description of the tactile interactions while discounting the effects of exploratory movement and object motion. Finger and object kinematics, including position, velocity, contact direction and applied force where available, will be included as covariates or latent variables so that labels reflect material and event properties rather than the specific way in which the surface was explored. CNNs will identify and extract critical spatial features from the eFinger data, which will feed into RNNs for modelling their evolution over time, capturing dynamic aspects of tactile interactions such as textural transitions, slippage, and material changes. T.2.1 Convolutional algorithm: Spatial distributions and deformation patterns (such as edges, curvatures, hardness/softness, etc) will be identified by employing the CNNs. They will be utilised to identify spatial relationships and deformation patterns from the eFinger data generated by the slower-acting filaments in combination with the ground truth virtual tactile events provided by the FEA. The deformation output of the filaments is inherently non-uniform, being distributed across the sensor field and depending on the points of contact and interaction characteristics. CNNs treat the deformation data as analogous to images, where each sensor output can be represented as a pixel of varying intensity. This will allow the network to extract meaningful features such as edges, textures, or contact points that are critical for understanding the nature of the object or surface being touched. The capacity of CNNs to discern intricate spatial patterns will provide a foundation for accurately identifying the properties and geometrical characteristics of the touched object. T2.2 Semantic language mapping: Spatio-temporal data generated by the eFinger during object/surface exploration, will be identified by employing Deep Learning based RNN architectures that are ideally suited for capturing spatio-temporal dependencies, such as those arising during tactile events involving history dependent contact evolution with possible frictional slip. RNNs will enable the Decoder to understand how tactile interactions from the eFinger evolve over time, capturing dynamics such as changes in applied force, vibration propagation, and slippage. For example, as an eFinger moves across a textured surface, the RNNs can maintain a temporal record of how the force and vibration profiles change, allowing the Decoder to infer transitions in textural properties and detect events such as incipient slip. The temporal modelling provided by RNNs is crucial for creating a realistic touch experience, since the sensation depends not only on the immediate contact but also on the sequence of past interactions.
P023 [Normal] The data collected from T1.4 will be used to train the Renderer to control the HFD. The Renderer will define a device-specific mapping from semantic labels, confidence estimates and movement state to HFD commands. Participants will perform a wide range of tasks in mixed-reality and virtual  environments designed to create multi-modal haptic signals (from pick and place to bimanual object manipulation). It is crucial to identify the most effective haptic features that are (i) readily perceived by the user, (ii) representative of the task and of the features that span the range of semantic labels, and (iii) feasible for the HFD device to deliver. The Renderer will determine those haptic signals that users associate with real-world tactile events and will leverage multisensory fusion to map intended perceived properties even when the haptic stimulus is not physically veridical (27 - 30). Users will learn the novel haptic vocabulary provided by the HFD and the ML architecture, and co-adapt to optimise the link between the eFinger data, semantic labels, and haptic signals generated by the HFD . The contribution of the VR audio and visual modalities will be considered. T3.1 Renderer training: Users will wear a virtual headset and an HFD to manipulate virtual objects and compare real object interaction, virtual rendering and HFD-mediated feedback. User reports will be collected using forced-choice judgements, rating scales and semantic-label matching. Outcome measures will include detection and discrimination thresholds, semantic-label agreement, perceived intensity, confidence, task completion time, manipulation errors, grip stability, and learning across repeated trials. The ML architecture will employ this information to identify those signals that are most suited to render each property of the semantic language. Similar to the procedure in WP2 for the Decoder, evolutionary algorithms and RNNs will be employed to tune the Renderer so that repeated HFD-mediated interactions will capture the users’ modified expectations of a tactile experience, making the feedback compatible with the range of sensations that the HFD can deliver despite not being veridical.T3.2 Adaptive co-adaptation: Users will wear a VR headset, interact either with a virtual object or in a mixed reality scenario in which a robot will mimic their movement with the eFinger on real objects. Participants will report those experiences they expect (e.g. semantic labels) and those they actually experience. User reports and manipulation performance will be employed to refine the Renderer, match the experience across different HFDs, and improve the manipulation performance in terms of dexterity, completion time and grip stability. Adaptive co-adaptation learning in these situations will be continuous since the user will adapt to the system and vice versa. Initially, each user will be introduced to standardised conditions and then the system will personalise their experience.
P024 [Normal] T4.1 eGlove: To demonstrate the performance of the eSkin, an eGlove will be made available to the Industrial Partners for trials on prosthetic and remotely controlled robotic hands. Trials will include anthropomorphic multi-finger hands and, where available through the partners, non-anthropomorphic grippers such as two-finger or parallel-jaw systems, so that performance can be assessed across different hand morphologies. The manufacturing process will be similar to that for the eFinger except that a carrier hand will be employed and the eTiles will be located on the fingers and palm. This flexible modular approach, with independent electronics for each tile and HFD, will simplify the design and manufacturing costs and allow, for example, reduced sensor density on the palm to mimic human hands. T4.2 eGlove task performance and user reports: Performance during manipulation will be assessed through ease of training assessment, dexterity improvement over a baseline condition, usability during one prosthetic or teleoperation scenario. User reports from the industrial partners will be analysed and collated to identify learnings that could be implemented in future eGlove designs. 
P025 [Normal] Risks (R) and mitigation (M):  R1: Blockages and malformed channels in the eSkins. M1: a range of alternative manufacturing techniques have been identified and there is a minimal reliance on the exact geometry of the channels. R2: Component shortages and logistical issues in sourcing could cause delays due to global factors severely impacting availability and pricing of high-end electronic components. M2: Alternative components or the design of the electronics will be sourced. R3: Delays by the industrial partners in evaluating the eGlove. M3: UoB has the necessary resources to undertake this activity and will carry out some of this work in parallel to avoid delays. R4: Limitations on the complexity of the semantic language and dynamic of the haptic rendering M4: The vocabulary and interaction range will be built progressively from a set of labels be expanded when psychophysical and manipulation performance show reliable improvement. If a label or haptic effect cannot be rendered consistently, it will be merged with a neighbouring label, restricted to a narrower interaction context, or deferred to later iterations. R5: Recruiting RA2 with expertise in both computational mechanics and machine learning techniques.M5: Recruitment will be made on a higher grade and expertise in developing computational methods for nonlinear mechanics problems and training by DP at SU on the development and application of ML techniques will be available.
P026 [Normal] Outcomes and impacts: The effective translation of outcomes into impacts will be achieved by i) through the Industrial Advisory Group ii) arranging two open workshops to disseminate progress and encourage feedback on the direction of the research, iii) publishing in high impact journals with the relevant readership, iv) presentations at conferences and seminars, v) creating a public facing website and vi) explore patent opportunities for the eSkin. 
P027 [Normal] Research environment: ATOUCH brings together the unique facilities, infrastructure and research environments that have been established across the research groups to support ATOUCH with the necessary equipment for undertaking the proposed research. At UoB, there is world-leading expertise in sensor design, skin properties and tribology, psychophysics and VR.  The facilities and equipment include access to ISO 7 cleanroom facilities, extensive facilities for microsensor fabrication, nanoscale 3D printing, rapid prototyping, mechanical characterisation and validation, tribometers located in an environmentally controlled laboratory, X-ray microcomputed tomography, robotics and the Blue Bear supercomputer as an additional facility to the server at Innogence Ltd for data processing. It also has a network of more than 100 researchers working in VR called BhamXR that provide expertise and technical support. SU has an internationally leading research track record in the application of FEA to complex systems and materials including applications to skin and haptic interactions. The Zienkiewicz Institute (ZI) at the Faculty of Science and Engineering at SU brings together advanced research in physical modelling, data science, AI and their synthesis, with a vision to deliver transformative solutions to real-world problems. High-performance computing facilities include the Impact Cluster and the Supercomputing Wales facilities, with a total of 4,920 cores and 47 TB of memory. RA3 can attend courses and seminars in nonlinear mechanics, computational modelling and ML learning techniques that underpin the proposed research. 

=== TABLES ===
TABLE 0: 1 rows x 1 cols
  R0: C0: WP1 eSkin development (Led by MA and DP)

TABLE 1: 1 rows x 1 cols
  R0: C0: WP2 Decoder (Led by DP)

TABLE 2: 1 rows x 1 cols
  R0: C0: WP3 Haptic renderer (Led by MDL)

TABLE 3: 1 rows x 1 cols
  R0: C0: WP4 Demonstration eGlove (Led by MA)
